Hey everyone, we are looking at some of the work problems coming out of chapter four.

These are going to cover all aspects that we saw in chapter four, going all the way from our demand to our elasticity.

So let's go ahead and jump into it.

And we do have a demand function leading us off, asking us to calculate the price elasticity.

So what we do know is that we have to take the derivative of this function to get the DQ DP part.

So what we want to do is take the derivative of this derivative of Q with respect to P and we're going to get minus 0.2 E to the minus 0.2 P.

Now, if you do recall your algebra, this is how we would take.

This is how we deal with our exponents, if you call your calculus as well.

Well, that's how we deal with it.

Now, the elasticity of demand, the price elasticity of demand is the percent change in quantity over the percent change in price.

And that, well, there we go.

And we multiply that by P over Q.

So I have the first part of that equation.

I have my price there, and I also have my quantity there.

Now, I don't necessarily need this right now, but I am going to get to it a little bit later.

So let's go in and let's just substitute in values for our elasticity of demand.

And this is going to be minus 0.2 E to the minus 02PMultiply that by P and then place this over our quantity, which is again the e to the minus 02p.

Now what I want to do is first of all just notice that I can isolate this part of the expression here.

That cancels down to one.

So I don't have to worry about that.

So that's going to leave me with minus 0.2 P.

And here we know that our price is 8.

And I'm going to just put this in and my elasticity is going to be 1.6.

So the interesting thing about this is that we do get this 1.6, and that lets us know that we are dealing with elastic demand.

Anytime you have an elasticity of demand greater than 1, you are dealing with elastic demand.

Now let's move to our next question.

Here we have a demand function q equals 10p to the minus 2.

And we want to calculate that with the price elasticity is, or excuse me, when the price is equal to 10.

So the first thing we want to do is just remember DQ DP times P over Q.

And what we need to do first is take the derivative of this demand function with respect to P.

And that's going to give us this minus 20p and then to the minus 3.

Because of the power rule, we subtract 1, so that becomes a minus 3.

Now, I want to put that into my formula.

So my elasticity of demand is equal to minus 20p to the minus 3.

And again, I don't necessarily need to put this in here right now.

I can, but it's not going to change much.

So I'm just going to leave it as times price and then over 10p to the minus 2.

Now, you'll notice we have 20 over 10.

So that's going to reduce down to 2.

And this goes to 1 there.

So I'm just going to rewrite this really quickly.

This is going to give me minus 2p to the minus 3 times price over p to the minus 2.

Now, next thing I want to do, and I could isolate either one, but I'm just going to isolate these two this time as opposed to what I did last time.

I'm going to isolate these two this time.

And when I do that, this gives me p over p to the minus two.

But when I pull this to the top, it actually gives me p to the three.  All right?

So now I can take that information, go back into my equation, and my elasticity of demand is now going to be 2p to the minus 3 times p to the positive 3.

What does that mean?

Now, these will cancel out, and my elasticity of demand is 2.

Now, one thing I do want to show you is that it doesn't matter what the price happens to be, the elasticity is always going to be two.

Let me show you what this looks like.

This is a constant function.

So here what we're going to see is that any change that I have at different points, my elasticity is always going to be two.

And I can clarify this probably easier by showing you what it looks like here.

So here's my numerator, and here's my denominator for the function that I just solved out right there.

And so what I'm going to do is first show you that I have a price of 10 here.  Okay?

I also have a price of 10 there.

Now, oops, I didn't mean to do that.

But now let's go in and let's change those prices up.

So Everywhere I see 10 where there was a p originally, I'm gonna Change it to 8.

All right, so let's change that to 8.

And let's come in here and let's Change this to 8.

And then I've got to have one more here, this to 8 as well.  And there.

Oops, that went to 2.5.

Oh, that's supposed to mean 10, not 8.  There we go.

So what we can see here is that it doesn't matter what the price happens to be.

The elasticity is going to be constant.

And that's because of the way the function is expressed.

Typically, you might have something like this, or you might have a linear demand curve in which you don't see a constant elasticity like that.

So let's jump into another question.

Here we have an elasticity based off some price changes.

So let's go ahead and let's solve this elasticity based off of our price changes.

We have an income increase of 1000 1200.

And we have a.

Let's see, good Y remains constant 10 per unit.

If consumer income increases their consumption of Good Y from 30 to 40, what is the income elasticity for good Y?

And remember, the income elasticity is a lot like the price elasticity.

The percent change, percent change in quantity over the percent change in our income.

Or we might say DQDI times I over Q.

Now, in this case, we don't have a function, so we don't have to worry about that.

All we have to worry about is using some type of midpoint method.

So in this case, we might say Q2 minus Q1 over I2 minus I1, multiply that by I2 plus I1 and then divide that by Q2 plus Q1.

So now all I have to do is come in here subbing the values that I have.

We go from 30 to 40 and we go from 1000 to 1200.

So let's sub in our values.

This is going to be 40 minus 30 over 1200, minus 1000, and then multiply that by 1200 plus 1000 over.

Whoops, there we go.  Over.

We had 40 plus 30.

Now this simplifies down to 10 over 200.

And this goes to 2200 over 71 and 7 and 1 and 11.

And so this gives us 7 11.

Actually the reverse of 7 11.

So we're going to go to the other gas station here.

We're going to have 11 over seven.

This is otherwise known as 1.57.

So lucky number seven.

All right, so let's move on to.

Oh, and this means that we're actually dealing with a luxury good because income elasticity is greater than one as opposed to being less than one and definitely less than zero.

So we're not dealing with an Inferior Good there.

So let's go to our next question.

Now, we're looking at price elasticity here when we have an actual linear function.

So when we calculate this, we're doing a point price elasticity, DQ over dp.

Multiply that by P times Q.

So let's go in here and let's do all of that work.

DQ DP is just going to leave me with minus four.

So this is going to be minus four times.

I give you a price of 30, but I don't know what Q is.

Now again, I could sub in Q if I needed to, or if I wanted to, I could sub in all of this and then solve it down.

Or I can take the 30, because this is a point price elasticity.

Take the 30, plug it in right there.

So 200 minus 4 times 30, which is 120, gives me 80.

Now I'm going to put that over 1.

So this is 1, and this is going to be 20.

And this becomes 3 over 2, which is also equal to 1 fifth.

So again, we have an elasticity of demand that is greater than one.

So this is elastic demand.

All right, that's elastic demand.

Let's move on to our next question.

So we have a marginal rate of substitution for video games and other goods.  The Mrs.

Is given to us by GRV and income is 200.

Prices are for video games, 50 for all other goods, 30.

What will video game purchases look like?

So what we're trying to figure out is the quantity of video game purchases based off of our marginal rate of substitution and our budget constraints.

So let's just go ahead and do a budget constraint here.

And remember, the Mrs.

Lets us know the Y good over the X good.

So G is going to represent our Y good on our indifference curve map, and V is going to represent our X good on our indifference curve map.

So if we set up our budget constraint, we're going to get something that looks like this, V being first.

So 50 times V plus 30 times G and that's equal to $200.

Now we can go into.

Or just recall, utility maximization occurs when the slope of the budget constraint PV over PG is equal to the marginal rate of substitution or G over V.

So all we have to do now is go in here and just substitute in some values.

So we have 50 over 30 as our slope of our budget constraint.

Set that equal to G over V and then solve down for G in this case.

So this is going to give us.

And the reason I'm doing that is because V is on the bottom here.

So this is going to give us five over three volts equals G.

Now, I can take this information, plug it back into my budget constraint.

50 volts plus 30 times 5 over 3 V is equal to 200.

And this is the same as saying 30 over 1 times 5 over 3.

This cancels down to 10.

So this gives us 50 volts plus 50 volts equals 200.

And that's 100 volts equals 200.

Divide both sides by 100 volts equals 2.

So in this case, how many video games will a person person purchase at their utility maximization bundle?

They're going to purchase two.

They are going to purchase two.

Now, look, we finally got to some graphs.  Hallelujah.

If the consumer is currently at consumption bundle E.

So let's find consumption bundle E.

Ooh, that's way too dark.

Let's go find a better color here.

We'll use this little funky color here.

So there, this consumption bundle E15 of whatever other goods are 20 on movie tickets.  Fun times.

It says, how much will they need to be compensated if they can no longer consume movie tickets?

All right, so that means what this person is going to be forced to do is move along their budget constraint all the way back up to point C.

You can clearly see at point C, they are below their indifference curve.

Now, to get them back on their indifference curve, we'd have to come up to the next level of income here, that or money spent here at 50, and compensate them.

So in this case, what we're going to get is we're going to move that person back to their indifference curve at point B, but we're going to have to compensate them $15 to do so.

So in this case, if this person can no longer purchase movie tickets for some reason, whatever that reason happens to be, then they have to be compensated, subsidized, whatever words you want to use, by $15 to have the same level of utility as they had before.

All right, this is our last question.

This is another consumer surplus question.

In this one, it says, what is the value of consumer surplus when the price is $18?  So here we go.

Price of $18.

Let's just draw a complete line there.

I'm using space pin right now.

And consumer surplus is everything.

This is neat.  Let's.

Let's just do all this right here.

Consumer surplus is everything below the demand curve and above the price being charged.  All right?

Everything below the demand curve and above the price being charged.

And I'm just prolonging what I'm saying here because I'm making a space looking cool looking triangle.

Very neat.

Very neat indeed.  There we go.

So this area here that is now space shaded is going to be the area of consumer surplus that we need to solve out for.

And we're going to go from our base, our intercept of 27, down to the price being charged.

So 27 minus 18, that is also called 9.

And then all the way from 0 to 30.

And we're going to have, so we're going to have what, zero minus 30.

Actually, we're going to do 30 minus zero, which is also called 30.

And so nine times 30 is otherwise known as 270.

And then half of 270 is lastly called $135 as our consumer surplus.

All right, that is it.

We have been going on and on and on.

I hope you've enjoyed this and you learned something and we'll catch you on our next one.

