Hey everyone we're going to be looking at uh incorporating some calculus and a little bit more uh algebra into our elasticity of demand we're going to look at income and price elasticity of demand cross price elasticity is going to work the same way you just deal with 2 different Goods but let's go ahead and just do a quick refresh of our price elasticity of demand uh here we're going to have the elasticity of demand of some good whatever it happens to be.

And that is going to be the percentage change in quantity demanded of that good over the percentage change of price of that good now we used a modified midpoint formula where we had Q2 minus q1 over P2 minus P1 and we multiply that by P2 plus P1 and Q2 uh Plus q1.

Now this again is the modified midpoint formula which allows us to get rid of a lot of the division that was in there but it works just the same and all we're doing is we're going into our graph here we're looking at 2 different points and we're trying to get the average of those 2 different points so that gives us the elasticity.

But what if we want something that's more precise what if we want to know the exact point so we're going to use a Point price elasticity which involves using calculus so if we have a point price elasticity we're going to be taking the partial derivative um in most cases it's just going to be a singular derivative but we'll use the partial derivative of uh derivative formula.

So that's going to be DQ.

DP and what we'll do is we'll go into an equation we'll take the derivative of that quantity function with respect to price.

And then that'll give us a starting point now what we have to do is also multiply it by the price over the quantity like what we have here so the DQ DP does this part then we multiply it by the price over the quantity which does that part but again it gives us a specific point price elasticity so if we know what our demand function is if we know what the price that we're charging is we can also get the quantity and it tells us the elasticity at that particular point.

Uh we could do the same thing for the income elasticity DQ d i and we multiplied that by our income over our quantity demand so again it works the same it would do the same thing for the cross price elasticity uh but let's just go ahead and let's jump into some questions and see how we do this so we're going to start with this question demand function for a product is Q equals 5 P to the minus 1 and we need to calculate the price elasticity when price equals 20.

So the first thing that we want to do is go into this function and take the derivative of quantity with respect to price and this is going to give us minus 1 excuse me minus 5.

This is going to give us minus 5 because we pulled the negative 1 down in front of the 5 uh minus 5 p and then subtract 1 out there minus 2 and now we're going to have our uh times our price over our quantity and right now I don't necessarily need to calculate what the actual quantity is I could do that if I wanted to but I'm just going to leave it in this form right here.

And I'm going to set up my equation so we know that our elasticity of demand is equal to DQ DP multiply that by P over Q so let's go ahead and uh bring all of this together so minus 5 P to the minus 2 multiply that by our price of 20 over our quantity of 5 P to the minus 1.

Now let's bring all of this together so this is Step 1 this will be uh Step 2 let's go to step 3 we're going to bring all of this into 1 combined equation.

And this is going to give us uh minus 5 times the 20 there so that's going to be minus 100 actually let me do it like this first let me bring it all into 1 thing first so minus 5.

P to the minus 2 multiply that by 20.

Over 5 P to the minus 1.

Now let us go ahead and um actually you know what let's not even do it like this let's go back and let's just leave this as p.

Cuz this is a very important point that we're going to look at with this particular function let's just leave that as P so I'm going to come back in here and I'm going to leave this as p as well all right so now what I'm going to do is I already see that this minus 5 and that 5 there's 2 things should cancel out.  So this should leave me with something that looks like this so I'm still calculating my elasticity of demand minus P to the minus 2 times p over P to the minus 1 now I want to isolate some effects here first so what I'm gonna do is just do some Dash lines around this area so I'm gonna isolate these 2 things by themselves and this is going to give me my fifth step and this is going to be um let me just kind of do it like this just ignore that minus P to the minus 2 this is going to give me.

P to the positive 1.

Plus P to the or times uh P to the um let's see here that's going to be also a positive 1 so this gives me P to the positive 2 now that I have P to the positive 2 I can come back into my equation and I have minus p.

To the minus 2 times P to the positive 2 and those 2 are going to cancel each other out so this just leaves me with a minus 1 as my elasticity of demand so the M the P to the minus 2 times P to the uh to cancels out my elasticity is minus 1 and what does this mean this means I have a unit elastic.

Demand all right typically when you see a function that looks like this it's going to be a unit elastic demand so your demand curve is going to look like this everywhere along this demand curve the elasticity is going to be 1 doesn't matter what the price is the elasticity of demand will be 1.

So that is this type of equation but what happens when we have an equation that looks like this now I'm going to go back in and I'm going to take the derivative of this uh demand function with respect to price and that's going to give me minus 2 now I need my elasticity equation.

And want to multiply by price over quantity right now I don't know what my quantity is but I'm actually going to uh put in the P equals 10 because again I'm dealing with the point price elasticity so that does it is going to help me figure this out a little bit quicker.

So I'm going to do the Q equals 100 - 2 * 10 which is going to be 20 so Q is going to be equal to 80.

All right so let's put in all of our numbers the elasticity of demand is equal to uh minus 2 times our price of 10 over our quantity of 80 and.

Just doing this uh simplifying this down to goes in 8040 times and this is going to give me 10 over 40 which is also equal to 1 over 4 which is also equal to 0.25 so in this case the elasticity of demand is equal to 0.25 that is less than 1 so we say it is an elastic all right this particular 1 is going to be inelastic for us.

All right so that's how we do it with the demand function now if we had more uh in our demand function that is if Q equals 100 minus 2 p uh let's call this 2px to let us know that we're dealing with a specific good uh minus let's say 5py uh plus let's say 2i now we have the price of another good we have our income uh so we could if we have that information we would just then absorb it into that intercept to help us figure out what the um actual price elasticity is going to be but for right now for our purpose this is where we want to focus in on.

Now let's do 1 last question here and this 1 is going to be.

A income elasticity question and what we're going to do here is just again.

Recall that the income elasticity is found by multiplying the derivative of that function with respect to income.

Times income over our quantity so I've given you the income of 50 we need to figure out what quantity is so let's go ahead and do the derivative first so DQ di that should be an i let's make that an i.

There we go.

Uh is going to give us 2 that is you come into this this equation actually this should be a partial derivative because I have more than 1 variable now so now.

I'm going to have that looking symbol as opposed to the straight uh D there I'm going to have this curly D I think it's a Delta uh in the Greek letters.

Uh so now because I have that P there I'm coming in and I'm taking a partial derivative so I'm focusing in on the eye but when I do that I get a positive 2 as the derivative now let's figure out what our uh quantity is going to be because we know what our income is going to be it's going to be 50 so let's take the 50 and the 25 and let's plug it into our equation minus 2 * 25.

Plus 2 Topps 50 so this is going to be uh 50 there that's going to be 100 there 100 minus 50 is 50 50 plus 100 is 150 so my quantity is 150 so 2 times 50 over 150 is going to be 2 times 1/3 and that is going to be 0.67 as my income elastic.

Because my income elasticity is between.

Uh 0 and 1 this lets me know that I'm dealing with.

A normal good.

If it was above 1 I would be dealing with a luxury good if it was negative I would be dealing with an inferior good and that is it uh that is all for our lastic with math hope you've enjoyed it and we'll catch you on our next one.

