Hey everyone we are now going to look at the income and substitution effects and how those 2 effects combined for a total effect to influence what it is that we're going to consume once we have a change in the price of good now let's go ahead and get some definitions out of the way and our first definition is going to be the substitution effect now the substitution effect is the change in quantity demanded for a good that is caused by substitution of 1 good for another and here what we're going to see is a movement along the original indifference curve that we're dealing with uh 1 way to think about the substitution effect is to consider the fact that whenever we have this change in the price of a good.

We will move to a new higher and different score.

So the thing that we need to do is compensate ourselves to put us back on the original indifference curve and that compensated budget constraint allows us to figure out what the substitution effect is now that might sound very complicated when you hear it but when you see it it'll click for you I know it will so then we also have the income effect now the income effect is the change in quantity demanded that is caused by a change in real income.

Here we're actually moving to that new indifference curve remember when we had the change in income.

Uh in a previous uh uh video and we saw how that moved us to a new indifference curve well here whenever you change the price of a good for example if the price of the good of of good X goes down and we were originally price of good X was maybe ten dollars and now the price of good X decreases and it's maybe equal to 5 dollars well that's going to change the budget constraints it's going to change the slope of the budget constraint and that's going to allow us to be on a higher indifference curve so that movement to the new and different curve is represented by the income effect so let's go ahead and let's uh see uh this stuff in action and we have our uh our graph here our set of axes here and I need to go ahead.

And add in an indifference curve in a budget constraint so let's do that let's add in.

This budget constraint here and I'm going to add in trying my best.

To do a nice and different curve I think that's all right and then let's add in our quantities.

And this will be y1 and this will be X1 where those 2 things intersect and remember whenever we set the slope of the budget constraint equal to the marginal rate of substitution.

We get the utility maximization point so y1 X1 represents utility maximization.

Now if we have a change in the price of X so here let's have the price of good X decrease so that's going to mean that by uh budget constraint is going to rotate outward along that x axis so let's do that.

That's not bad so the green line there represents my new budget constraint uh the black line is my original budget constraint now whenever we have this we're also going to see that we have a new indifference curve because we can Now consume more due to that lower end of the price all right so let's try this we're going to come down actually I'm just going to start right here.

Like I do all of my different curves.

And there we go so now we have this new and different curve and I'm going to map this in here a little bit.

And then down there we go X2 and Y2 so this is my new utility maximization uh bundle of goods Y2 X2 but now we need to bring in what the actual income and substitution effects are now to do that what we need to do is give this individual a compensated budget constraint that means what we're trying to do is get back to the original indifference curve because we're saying hey.

If this change didn't happen where would you still find some maximization some utility maximization and so to do that what we're going to do is take this new budget constraint and create a create 1 that looks uh that's that's parallel to it doing my best there that's parallel to it so these 2 should look the same I didn't quite.

Right but we're going to say that they are completely tangent.

Okay notice what happens when we go along the old indifference curve where now at Y3 and here we're going to go down and this is going to be X3 so now we can find out what the substitution effect is it's going to be the movement along the old indifference curve to the new compensated uh bundle of goods so X1.

To X3 represents the substitution effect all right now.

To figure out what the income effect is you move from the new compensated bundle to the new bundle of goods that you're actually going to consume so from X2 to X3 we're going to get the income effect so I mentioned earlier from X1 to uh uh let's see here.

X1 to X2.

And in conjunction with that y1 to Y2.

That is going to give us the total effect really in in fact the total effect is just the summation of the substitution effect and the income effect so here what we end up getting is this move to here is our total effect but it's made up of the substitution effect and the income effect all right so that's a that's what we have when we have uh the price of the good falling.

What happens if we have the price of the good Rising so let's start up here this time because I'm going to work my way into the graph a little bit better.

Oh that's terrible.

Let's try this 1 more time.

It's a little bit better all right and let's add in our budget or our indifference curve.

There we go there's our indifference curve called that i1 and at this point they're not tangent but if you make the dots big enough they are tangent.

And here we have X1 and we have y1 all right now let's have the price of the good decrease so in this case we're going to say the price of not decrease increase price of good X is going to increase so whenever the price of a good X increases the budget can trend is going to rotate inward so let's do that.

That's decent enough all right so now we've had this budget constraint rotate inward now let's look what happens let's go ahead and draw in our new and different curve.

And in this case I'm going to put it right here.

And ooh that didn't quite like that oops lost my um just going to reverse that lost my there we go.

Let's try this 1 more time.

Trying to make these parallel to 1 another there we go I too and here we go.

And drop down so this becomes X2 and this becomes Y2 so price increases we 1 good we expect the other good to uh increase in terms of its consumption that that makes sense um so we are going to have some substitution and income effects come into play and let's go ahead and do that let's use red this time.

So again remember whenever you're doing this it's a parallel shift of the compensated uh excuse me parallel shift of the.

Budget constraint that becomes the compensated budget constraint and what I'm going to do here to make this a little bit easier on myself.

Is.

Redraw it a little bit better so there we go.

And I need to shift this green line over to about right here.

And there's my compensated curve all right so now let's add in.

Some new bundles this is Y3 and this is X3.

And let's analyze what's taking place all right so start with the substitution effect.

We know it is a change from uh the old bundle of goods to the new compensated bundle of goods so that is going to be X1 to X3 here so X1 to X3.

Becomes our substitution effect right there.

And then the income effect.

Right here is going to be uh from the compensated bundle to the actual new bundle that we're going to consume and so that's going to be X3.

To.

2 and so right here this area.

That is moving from this point all the way down at that point is going to be our income effect and then the total effect here is just the combination of uh our substitution effect and our income effect so here we have our total effect and that is going from this point.

All the way to this point.

And that's the combination of the substitution and the income effects so in the end.

What we get is a decrease in our uh consumption of X and an increase in our consumption of why now that doesn't always have to be the case you could have things like inferior Goods you could have things like GIF and goods uh and in fact let's go ahead and look at an inferior good here let's have.

A gander so to speak at an inferior good in this case.

What we have to consider here is the fact that the income effect is actually going to be negative so we might still be increasing with uh in in the substitution effect but the income effect is going to back some of that substitution effect off so let's draw in we're going to have the uh price of the goods going to um let's have the price of the good decreases.

So we're going to have our original budget constraint here.

And this is our indifference curve.

Call this I want again and this will be our um bundle of goods while 1 and X1 and then let's have our new budget constraint due to the fall and the price of the good here.

Whoa went really far out there but that's okay and we're going to have our new.

Um let's say right here.

This will be our new and different curve.

R2 right there now let's draw in the compensated um let's draw in the compensated 1 here and again I'm going to take the screen line I'm going to compare a little come about right.

Let's look that looks pretty good that looks pretty parallel.

Right there now what happens first I just noticed I didn't put in the new bundle of goods.

New bundle of goods right here.

X2 and in this case we're going to have Y 2.

And then let's go back to our compensated curve here is where it's the most tangent it looks like this is X3 and then this becomes.

W3.

All right so start with the substitution effect.

X1 to X3 it's from the original point on our original uh in difference curve where it met our original budget constraint to the new compensated bundle so this is the substitution effect.

But look what happens the income effect actually moves backwards.

We go from X3 to X2 because we're going from the compensated bundle to the bundle that we actually consume so in this case we actually have an inferior good we have now why it does look like that we are still consuming some of X when the price of a good Falls what we're having here is the substitution effect outweighing the income effect but the important part is to remember that the uh inferior good is really having a negative uh uh a negative income effect take place uh there's 1 other special case and that's the GIF and good I'm not going to draw that 1 out but I am going to explain it briefly uh the gifing good is a case where when when you have uh the income effect being so negative that it outweighs the uh substitution effect and what you actually end up getting is well I guess I am going to draw it out here aren't I what you actually end up getting is a upward sloping demand. Curve so instead of a downward sloping demand curve.

Your demand curve is upward sloping and this is again because.

Because the uh the income effect is so negative that it does outweigh that uh substitution effect now this isn't really 1 that is all of that important because typically uh the income effect is so small um that is we the amount of income that we spend with proportional changes doesn't really affect us that much so while it is kind of an intriguing concept it's not 1 that we encounter uh that much all right that is it for the income and substitution effects and we will catch you in our next.

