Hey everyone we are back for another look at income and substitution effects and this 1 what we are going to do is build a model and we're going to look at how that model changes whenever we have a price uh change to go along with that so let's go ahead and jump into this uh new look and we're going to start with our indifference curve and our budget constraint here we have a utility function that says utility is equal to X raised to the 1/2 y raised to the 1/2 this is a Cobb Douglas utility function uh we also have our.

Uh budget constraint there is our standard budget constraint so let's go ahead and add in some other items here we have income of $100 price of good X is $10 price of good Y is 5 dollars and when we solve for how much of each you can purchase we get 10 of X and we get 20 of Y so those are our endpoints for our budget constraint and then we can further solve for the slope of the budget constraint which is PX over py so 10 dollars over 5 dollars gives us a slope of 2.

All right that means for everyone X that this person wants they have to give up 2 of why.

Now let's go ahead and do a little bit of calculus here and that little bit of calculus that we're going to do is going to help us find the marginal uh utility of good X and of good y so we're going to take the partial derivatives of good X and of why and when we do that you'll notice what I've used is the power rule of calculus that's just as much as we're going to use in this course.

And what we have here.

Is 1/2 x raised to the minus 1/2 * y to the 1/2 and because of the symmetry of this cob Douglas function all we have to do is just change around uh the utility function for good Y and we get something that looks very similar.

Now we're going to simplify this expression a little bit we're going to uh get rid of a lot of the 1 halves.

And when we do that.

You'll notice that the margin utility for good X and that should also say good why not good X right there um but the margin utility of good X is now the square root of Y which is y raised to the 1/2 over 2 and that 2 comes from the 1/2 that was out in front of the X uh 2 times the square root of x and now X is on the bottom because we have that minus 1/2 so that's why we pulled this x down here and we Square it and we have the same thing for the margin utility of good Y imagine that's a y and not a x we just reverse where the X and Y positions are.

Okay now we need to get the margin utility per last dollar spent equal across both Goods because this tells us where our indifference curve is going to be so I'm going to equate the margin utility of good X over the price of good x to the margin utility of good y over the price of good y so now this tells me.

On the last dollar spent that I have going across both of these Goods I should have those ratios equal to 1 another so what I'm going to do.

Is just plug in the information that I have so I took the margin utility of good X and I'm multiplied it by the price so you'll now you'll notice uh we have 10 down here at the bottom we have 5 down here at the bottom and that works along with what we see right here now I need to simplify this by doing some cross multiplication uh and when we do that we end up with 10 why.

Equals 20x so we just multiply the 2 times the 10 and the 2 times the 5 and then we rearrange the terms the square roots will cancel each other out uh if you do a square root of 9 times a square root of 9 you get what 9 because 3 times 3 is not so the square roots will cancel themselves out and we are left with 10 y equals 20x or we could also say Y equals X.

Now we need to find the optimal bundle before I put in my indifference curve so I know what the marginal utility per per last dollar spent is right here y equals 2x and that also happens to be what the budget.

Constraint is but I want to know what is the actual bundle of goods that I am going to be consuming at this y equals 2x so to do that we need to find what the optimal bundle is so I'm going to go back into my budget constraint.

And I'm going to put in all the numbers that I have 100 equals 10x plus 5 and now all I'm doing is subbing in the y equals 2x so the Y would have been right here so I put in the 2x where that why is and I'm going to get 100 = 20x and we could easily see that 5 equals X.

Do the same thing for why now that I know that 5 equals x put the 5 in where X was solve it down.

And we get y equals 10 so now I know what my optimal bundle of goods is and I can clearly see this is where my indifference curve is going to lock.

Okay so good so far but now let's take it up a notch and let's look at what happens with the price change so again the same graph that we just constructed but now we're going to let the price of X fall from ten dollars down to 5.

So our new consumption of x if we consume only X is going to be 20 and now we have a new budget constraint that budget constraint rotated outwards.

And we can Now consume 20 if that's all that we want to consume.

Now let's bring back in the marginal utility per last dollar spent principle that we found in the first slide but you'll notice what I've done is I've changed out the 5 or I changed out 10 for A5 so here it's the same equation that we previously saw because this utility curve is the same utility curve but now I have a 5 there instead of a 10 so what we find in simplifying this is y equals x goes to the same mechanics that we previously saw now that I know that Y equals X I can go back into my budget constraint and calculate my optimal bundle.

So here 100 equals 5x plus 5x and solving down 100% X and so x equals 10.

Okay so X now equals 10.

Take that x equals 10 plug it into the budget constraint for uh software Y and we're going to find that y also equals 10 so now we know where our new and difference curve is going to be it's going to be at y equals 10 and x equals 10 so we have moved to a higher indifference curve we're better off this is all well and good simply because the price of 1 good fail but what we really want to do is figure out how we got there what were the effects that went into getting us to this new and difference curve that is what were the substitution effects what were the income effects.

So let's have a look at how we do that so what we want to do now is look at the compensated bundle of goods how did we get to the compensated.

Bundle that is if I were to remain on that original utility curve right here uh in different curve right here uh I need to find another point on that curve that would satisfy uh being compensated to be there so here what I want to do is take this budget constraint this new budget constraint and have a line that is parallel to it but just also touches the original indifference curve so right here at this point.

We have a compensated budget constraint.

And now what we want to do is figure out what is the bundle of goods at that point so here we have our original utility function uh you equals 5 to the 1/2 10 to the 1/2 and that comes from the original numbers that we had so when we solve this down we get uh a utility of that's equal to the square root of 50 now when you're looking at a compensated budget constraint we don't know what that new income is going to be so what we have to do is come in here.

And we have to figure out what the income actually is but we really don't even need to do that because we're only concerned with this particular point we know what the indifference curve utility is going to be the square root of 50 it's like 7.07 or something like that and then we know what the uh the the slope of the budget line is it's the price of x divided by the price of Y or 5 over 5 which equals 1 and so that means x equals y and since x equals y all I have to do is solve that down and then we do we get 7.

It's actually the square root of 50 but uh we're going to say we only consume a whole numbers and so 7.

Will be our compensated bundle.

Now.

The substitution effect is going to be the change in quantity demand uh that moves along the indifference curve so up to a new Point uh that would still keep us at the same level of utility and that's just going to be from the 10 all the way down to the 7.

So in this case we lose 3 units of why we gain 2 units of X and that makes sense you substitute towards the now relatively cheaper good uh and away from the relatively more expensive good and then the income effect is going to be the move from the old indifference curve to the new indifference curve so the change in the quantity from the uh the compensated uh utility to the new utility and so that's going to be a move of 7 to 10 for good X and a move from 7 to 10 also for good y.

So our substitution effect in in summary here you gain 2x you lose 3 why our income effect we gain 3X we lose 3 Y and then our total effect is we gain 5x and we lose know why so in total the income effect actually in this example outweigh the substitution effect a little bit but in total what we see is that we do move to a higher level of utility simply because the price of that good decreased all right that's it hope you've enjoyed it.

