Hey everyone we are kicking off this chapter by looking at demand functions homogeneity and income now the goal here for this entire chapter is to build these individual demand curves move into market demand curves and then understand how changes in prices and income and all those other things affect those demand curves so that way we have a really good understanding of the consumer side of the choice of maximization problem now let's go ahead and jump into demand functions and let's first Define our demand function to be the quantity of good x uh is a function of the price of good X the price of good y the uh income that the individual has and any preferences PR there that the individual has towards a good so.

When we're looking at this function we're saying these things individually can affect the person's uh.

Quantity demand for that particular item so if we do the same for good why because we've been dealing with 2 Goods then we'd have the same thing we'd have the price of good y the price of good X their income and their preferences so these are the things that we're going to be looking at for the individual's demand curve when we move to the market demand curve there are other factors that will influence that but for the individual these are the ones that we want to focus in on so we know that the price of good X as it increases it's going to lead to a decrease in the quantity of good X if the price of good y Works a decrease then the quantity of good X would increase if income increases for the individual then we would expect quantity of good X to increase and then preferences are 1 of those things that tend to remain stable.

So we're not going to look at it as much but let's say a successful advertising campaign influences someone to want to purchase that item then changes in preferences will affect how much that person wants to consume to go along with our demand function we also want to bring back in our budget constraint so the price of good X.

Uh times X plus the price of good y times Y and that's equal to income now this is where the homogeneity concept comes in with the budget constraint with the consumer that is a budget constraint is homogeneous uh if the proportions of prices and income change in the same manner so that is if I double the price of good X and I double the price of good Y and then I also double my income then nothing has really changed nothing's really changed let's look at an example of how this works let's say that the price of good X is equal to $10 and the price of good Y is equal to uh let's say 5 dollars and then let's set our income equal to.

$100 all right now I'm going to go in and I'm going to just rewrite my budget constraint to account for these uh items here so this is going to give me uh ten dollars times good X plus 5 dollars good Y and that's equal to $100 now I can do a few things here let's say that uh I want to know how much of good X I can consume if I consume none of good Y and let's do that so just remember that's the income divided by the price of good X and that's going to give me 10.

So if I consume no good why I can consume 10 of good X let's do the same thing.

For the price of good W if I consume no X in all wide and that's 100 divided by 5 and that's going to give me 20 so when we're just starting with the original budget constraint right here we see that we can consume 10 of good x 20 of good why we could consume some combination uh in between if we want to do a combination in between um we could say hey let's take half of our income let's spend it on um X half of our income let's spend it on Y and if we did that so we're saying $50 goes to X $50 goes to Y then we'd have 5 uh of good X being bought and we'd have 10 of good wide being bought.

All right now let's go in here and let's change this up so now we're going to double the price of good X double the price of good Y and double our income so now we're going to have 20x.

Plus 10 W and that's equal to 200 all right so now.

How much can I consume of each good so again income divided by the price of good x 200 divided by 20 and that is going to give me 10 so that matches right there.

And then let's do the same thing for good y uh if I consume no good X all of good y That's 200 divided by 10 and that is going to give me.

20 so again.

It's the same as it was this is what we mean by homogeneity uh with this particular uh function that is if I proportionally increase both prices and income.

Nothing's going to change nothing's going to change what we have to look at is things in real terms okay we have to look at things in real terms again if I were to do half of my budget.

Um.

If I'm going to do half of my budget to X half of my budget to Y so a hundred dollars goes to good X $100 goes to good why then what do I get well I'm going to get again 5 and 10.

So again nothing's changing so let's take this information and let's move to our.

Demand curve not our demand curve our indifference curve and our budget constraint and let's say that we are going to be dealing with this original budget constraint here so what I'm going to do is just go ahead come in here.

And add in my uh how much I can consume of each 20 and 10 and then I'm going to add in an indifference curve right here.

I'm going to call this i1 and we're just going to use the example that we had of uh 10 and 5.

All right so we're going to say at this point of time to see the.

Uh slope of the budget constraint is equal to the diminishing marginal returns uh that we have with our indifference curve now let's go in here and let's double.

We're going to double our budget constraints we're going to increase our income by $200 but we're not going to change the price of the good all right so we're going to increase our income by $200.

But we're going to use the original prices so let's do that.

Now when I come in here and I double my budget and I kind of want to make this so I am actually doubling it on the graph.

Yeah ooh I kind of like said hey I'm going to go around.

That I there is let's just see if I can do this.

There we go it's a little bit better so if I double it now I can consume 40 of good Y and 20 of good X remember I'm just doubling my income prices aren't changing so I'm taking 200 and I'm dividing it by 10 for x and I'm taking 200 and I'm dividing it by 5 for y so that's where the 40 comes from and that's where the 20 comes from now notice what happens I can consume more both.

And I'm going to have a higher indifference curve right here I'll try to get it as close as I could.

There we go and if again if I'm taking half of my income and I'm spending it on X half of my income and I'm spending it on why so let's do that so we have a hundred dollars.

That can go to good X we have a hundred dollars that can go to Goodwill so take the um.

Price of good X the price of Goodwill uh 5 of what was it.

Price of good W was uh 5 dollars so 100 divided by 5 is 20.

So now 20 is going to be how much of why I consume price of good X is 10 I have a hundred dollars that I'm devoting towards it so that means 10 is going to be the amount that I consumed there and I try to draw it just right I didn't quite get it but there we go so now you can see.

That we have achieved more we are now consuming much much more than what we were so here uh as income increases the quantities of both of those goods are going to increase and that's going to cause us to move to a higher indifference curve now when we start to shift our demand curves this is going to come back into play so we're going to just hold off on doing too much more with this uh but we will get back to this a little bit later.

Now this also kind of brings up an interesting idea about normal Goods normal goods are goods for which whenever and I'm just going to write this here normal Goods.

Our goods for which whenever your income increases your demand uh for those goods also tends to increase so what you see right here in this graph is exactly that our demand has increased simply due to the fact that our income has increased now with um uh with our income.

Here we go I want to bring this over here with our income we do have 1 issue and that is what's called engle's law.

Angle uh Ernst Engel back in the 1800s noticed that as incomes Rose the amount that was spent on food uh tended to fall and let me go back up the food also had housing uh doing the same thing there that is as my proportion of income increases as you can see as it's doing right here this is from the 2023 consumer expenditure survey the share of my income that goes to uh my uh to food purchases false this is Les law so he notices back in the 1800s and we still notice this today and also I was just scrolling down to the to uh housing and we also noticed that this takes place as well so here are 404139 so on and so forth all the way down to 29.25% or more so that's Les law Engels law it just shows that as income increases for goods like food we tend to spend less of our income. On that and I'm just going to write angle here so that way you can understand what I was saying so angles law.

All right let's move to uh inferior Goods so we talked about normal Goods uh necessities and normal Goods you also have um luxury goods.

Let me write that in here I didn't write it up.

We also have luxury goods those are goods for which uh you you're going to as your income starts to increase by more and more you're going to start purchasing those things things like Yachts for example that's a luxury item but what about our inferior.

Goods what about inferior Goods these are goods for which whenever the income increases what we tend to see is that uh your demand for these items.

Excuse me as your income increases your demand for these items tends to decrease.

All right income increases so I'm going to write this as income.

Increases demand for these items tend to decrease things like Ramen noodles.

Um things like public transportation secondhand clothing uh those are the items that we tend to see people buy less of as they have more income so here we have Y and X but let's actually just rename these.

Let's call this car.

And we'll call this PT for public transportation so people with private cars versus people riding the bus I guess we could write this bus that would be a little bit easier there taking a bus ride versus a car ride people tend to want to prefer car rides uh as opposed to bus rides and as uh their income increases they demand less of those bus rides so let's draw that in.

We're going to start here on this initial budget constraint.

And we're going to put you down here.

You don't really want this much but you're going to you're going to consume that anyway so this is C1 this will be B1 for bus and this is our indifference curve now our income is going to increase again let's change colors.

Income increases here all right now we're going to have a new and different curve.

Up here it's like income increased pretty good bit you're in difference curve is now here.

And look what happens.

Now we have C2 we are consuming more cars or car payments or whatever you want to call it there and our bus rides have decrease to B2 that is a decrease in the quantity of bus rides that we want at that higher income level so this is why we have these types of inferior Goods all right that is it for our demand functions uh our introduction to demand functions homogeneity and our changes in income and we'll catch you on our next 1.

