Hey everyone, we have already looked at how we construct our market demand curves.

But now what we want to do is look at the equations behind these market demand curves.

Now, I am going to be looking at these from a linear perspective.

That is, we are looking at a linear demand curve, one that doesn't have a shape that might be defined by a unit elastic demand.

So let's go ahead and jump into this here.

We're going to be starting with a individual demand function here and you can see how it's represented.

QD raised the I there.

This just lets you know that we're dealing with individual demand.

And we have some parameters there.

A, B, P, C&D, PC.

Now, these individual parameters and variables represent different things.

We're going to look at each of those individually.

So we have P being the price of tacos.

So this is the actual good that we are concerned with.

I represents income, and we're setting that at $200 per week.

And then PC that represents the complement good is going to be the price of margaritas at $8.

So then we have some other parameters there, A, B, C and D.

And these just represent the individual parameters that are attached to the variables.

That is how they affect those variables.

Here A represents the fact that this is where our demand curve starts.

This is the intercept for the demand curve.

We put a responsiveness measure on the price of two.

We also have the responsiveness or sensitivity for our income at point one and then the same thing for the complement good of 0.5.

Now what we want to do is take all the information that's been given to us and place that into our market demand.

So what we're going to do is scale this up a bit.

So let's go ahead and let's just insert all of the parameters and all the variable values except for the price of tacos.

Because what we're trying to do is get to a demand curve or demand function for the singular good.

So all I've done is taken all of the values that we've been given here and we've been given here, and I've placed them into their respective areas.

Now, when we simplify this down, we get QD is equal to 36 minus 2P.

Let's assume that we have 500 individuals inside that market.

So this could be some kind of restaurant that is looking at a specific segment of 500 individuals.

And this is what they know.

And so they go in, they figure out this individual demand for the representative consumer, and then they multiply that by the 500 and then they get their market demand of QD equals 18,000 minus 1000p.

So what do we do with this information?

Well, let's go ahead and figure out what happens to quantity demand whenever I add in a price.

So let's say currently we're selling tacos at $3 each.

How much is my quantity demand?

All we have to do is substitute in the price and we find that Quantity demand is $15,000.

Now let's look at what happens whenever we change up a complement good.

I mean, that is, we're looking at margaritas.

So what happens to the price, what happens to our quantity demand of tacos whenever the price of margaritas rise to $10?

Now, originally they were $8, so we have a 20% increase.

Actually, this is 25% increase in the price of margaritas going from $8 to $10.

So what do we need to do?

Let's go back into our equation.

And I want you to notice that I don't make this $10.

Instead, I make this 10 minus $8.

And the reason why I'm doing that, as opposed to a straight substitution, is simply because the $8 served as a base point or a reference point.

So what we're trying to do is figure out what happens from that reference price or reference point.

And whenever we change the price of that complement good, that is, how does it actually affect our taco consumption, our taco quantity demand, whenever we increase that price by $2, as opposed to just going from $8 to $10.

And so what we see here, by plugging in that information, our new individual demand is going to be 29.

Multiply that 29 by 500 and we get 14,500 as our new quantity demand.

So increasing the price of our margaritas lowers the amount of tacos that we consume.

And this makes sense.

We know that this reflects the economic theory.

And so all of this works out really nicely, really well.

And this is how you might estimate individual demand and market demand in a particular market.

So let's look at another example.

Suppose now that tacos are an inferior good.

So we're going to do the same setup.

But now instead of having that positive parameter in front of income, I have a negative parameter in front of income.

So that lets me know I'm dealing with an inferior good as opposed to a normal or luxury good.

I've got some new parameters that I'm dealing with.

So that way it makes it a little bit easier to see the math and how it works out.

But everything else starts the same price of tacos is$3,500.

Individuals in the market, $200 in income.

Price of margaritas is$8.

And so all we're going to do is just replace everything that we see with what we have.  So let's do that.

Just substituting in our parameter values and our variable values, and we're going to get a quantity demand of 6.

So when tacos are inferior good, with all of these parameters set as they are, all these variable values set as they are, individual demand for tacos is six.

Multiply that to our market demand, and we see that our market Demand gives us 3,000.

Okay, let's take it a step further.

Income increases to 250.

What happens when you have an inferior good and your income increases to 250 instead of decreasing?

Well, we know when we have an inferior good, what we should expect to see happen is a decrease in our consumption.  I think that's right.

Let's find out.

So we're going to substitute in this new piece of information, and look what happened.

Our Quantity demand fell to 5, it was 6.

And our market demand fell to 2500.

Makes sense, because what again we see is that inferior good is going to cause a decrease in our demand and our quantity demand whenever we have a change in our income.  So there you have it.

Those are two examples to show you how we can take these demand functions, take some parameter and variable estimates, plug them in there, and figure out what our prices and our quantities are based off of those measures.

All right, Hope you've enjoyed it, and we'll catch you in our next one.

