Hey everyone we are going to kick off this chapter by looking at a way that Economist model how consumers choose things now you clearly see the 2 items here in front of us that is utility and preferences and this is what economists are going to use to help us identify uh how much people want to consume how much they actually consume those kind of things let's go ahead and jump into it.

So we're going to start with the concept of utility that is a term that economists use to measure satisfaction that consumers get from consuming a good or a service so here's a more formal definition uh that we can look at but with utility if you think about a whole pizza and you have 8 slices in that whole pizza uh you're gonna get some utility from consuming some of those slices of pizza that is you're going to get some satisfaction from consuming that pizza if you're drinking a a few beers you're going to get some satisfaction from that as well if you're going to a baseball game or a football game you're going to a movie you're all going to get utility from those things because you're taking part in an activity in which you chose to do now the thing about utility is everyone has a different valuation of how much satisfaction that they get from their consumption.

So what I uh deem as uh valuable you may not deem as valuable what I get let's say the way the standard word that we use is called utils utils uh I might get a 100 utils from consuming a couple slices of pizza you may not you may get less or you may get more that's because we all have some subjective valuation that goes into what we consume.

Now with utility you get 2 different types of utility the first is the total utility you get from consumption that is how much utility per slice of pizza per round of beer or per game of baseball whatever it happens to be how much overall satisfaction are you getting now here I'm using the example of tacos if I have a 3-pack of tacos in front of me uh I'm going to get some total level of utility from consuming those 3 tacos now the other type of utility is marginal utility the first Taco is probably going to give me a lot of satisfaction.

The second Taco will probably also give me satisfaction but I don't think it's going to give me as much satisfaction as that first 1 the third taco probably won't give me as much satisfaction uh as well.

So with marginal utility what we're talking about is the additional satisfaction you get from consumption of whatever it is that you are consuming now I also kind of talked a little bit about uh the concept of the law of diminishing marginal utility that is as you continue to consume more and more of the same good you're going to get less utility in return from the consumption of that additional uh item or that additional good additional tacos I'm using right here so let's talk about Bob Bob really loves tacos you can see here Bob has a taco shirt he's holding a taco he's at a taco stand Bob is just enjoying life with tacos and this is what Bob is going to uh his utility that he's going to get.

So the first talk of Bob consumes uh 30 uh units of utility however we measure uh utility and the marginal utility you go from 0 to 1 margin utilities also going to be 30 now Bob really loves tacos in fact so much so that the second Taco Bob has now has a total utility of 65 and marginal utility of 35 that is Bob increased his margin utility from 3035 with that second taco.

But you notice as we go from tacos 2 to 3 and 3 to 4 total utility is still increasing but it's increasing at a now decreasing rate this is the law of diminishing marginal utility I'm going to continue to consume uh these tacos or Bob is going to continue to consume these tacos but Bob's not going to get as much satisfaction from each additional Taco now at the fifth taco.

Bob actually has negative utility that is we went from 92 total utility to 90.

Uh total utility that we have a margin utility of minus 2 so in this case.

What we are seeing is negative utility Bob should not have engaged in eating that taco now look at Bob he had to change shirts now he's in his big taco shirt and he's just looking at this like oh I shouldn't.

That uh that fit Taco but but Bob did all right so now let's move on to preferences and understanding.  How we take utilities and and preferences together so preferences describe how individuals rank different choices available to them based on the level of satisfaction that each choice brings so we like to rank things uh as as people we we can put groups of goods together we could say you know I like this 1 I like this 1 this is how much I like this 1 this is how much I don't like that 1 whatever it happens to be now with our preferences we have a few assumptions we have 3 and in fact completeness is the first that is we can take all the goods that we're going to consume and we can actually rank.

Okay I can say I prefer tacos to pizza and I and I prefer Pizza to to um burgers or whatever it happens to be I can you know I can rank how I like things.  The second 1 is transitivity you know the first 1 kind of leads to the second 1 that is here we're saying if I prefer 1 to to another and that 1 to another then the first item because I prefer to the second item I have to also prefer it to the third item because I prefer the second item to the third item so here I say coffee to tea and tea to soda I have to prefer coffee to soda based off the transitivity property now this is a really important property that we're going to get into later.

With our indifference curves that's in other videos uh but this is a very important property because if we don't have transitivity we can't correctly ranked things uh such that 1 is preferred to all the others if you're ranking it that way then we're going to have an issue of a person not being able to choose between some different items it's going to break down the model and all that good stuff or should I say bad stuff and then the third is non-satiation generally people.

For people more more is better than less.

More is better than less that's what we mean by non satiation so when we look at this we're going to say if I can continue to get more tacos and pizza then it's better than having less tacos and pizza based off of our little graph that we have here down in the left corner it's just been sitting there kind of wondering hey when you're gonna get to me we're gonna get you right now.

So the area I just shaded in here this little yellow gradient shaded area um we have 2 uh we have tar and we have tar.

And that bundle of goods is preferred to everything below.

Uh in that yellow box area.

The person can obviously choose anything in that box area but.

We're looking for the best bundle for us and and tarp star is obviously going to be it all right and then next we're going to have.

Screen shaded area and the green shaded area is the non-satiation uh area that is more is better because you have more tacos you have more pizza uh that is you know we'd like to be in that green area but right now we're kind of in this tar pestar area for reasons we haven't yet explained but we will get to in later uh videos but right now we we don't really want the yellow area we really want the green area but tarp star is okay with us now we do have the 2 2 other areas that we have it highlighted and we really don't know about those because that represents some combination that we aren't ranking appropriately or something like that we may like it we may not like it we may have to bring in something else to help us figure that out.

But we are interested in this point here this point uh T star P star we are interested in that simply because that provides a bundle for us in which.

We we'd like it we don't mind moving away from it if we go to the green area but we definitely don't to move away from it if we go to uh the yellow area so that is our preferred combination of tacos and Pizza in this particular case all right that is it for our utility and purposes this is serving as the starting point for helping us understand the model of consumer choice and I hope you enjoyed it.

