Hey everyone we are now going to combine what we previously looked at into our utility maximization model this is ultimately what we were trying to get to to try to understand.

What combination of goods a person is going to want to choose in order to maximize their utility let's jump into it.

So we're going to start with our familiar example here where we have tacos in quesadillas as the 2 good that we are choosing between we have some combinations already placed inside of this graph we have uh points a b and c and uh these should look familiar if you've been following along with the other videos we can also do a 100 tacos and zero quesadillas or zero tacos and Tim quesadillas but we're not really looking at that right now but we're going to focus in on these 3 combinations so let's first start with an income of 100 dollars case is our 10 dollars and tacos are $1 so that gives us that familiar budget constraint.

That we've so come to love now when we look at this budget constraint we would say hey you know what is if I'm consuming that point B then everything is good because I'm consuming on my budget constraint and uh yeah I'm getting exactly what I want.

But what happens when we add in the indifference curve that we've already looked at so we know that the indifference curve tells us that any combination of 2 Goods uh along this indifference curve is going to yield the same level of utility.

So if we look at Point a and we look at Point C we can clearly tell that we're on our budget constraint we're on our indifference curve.

But is this where we really want to be.

Look at point B point B is also on that budget constraint just like point a and point C but the uh indifference curve.

Is below.

Point B.

So this tells us something this tells us that the marginal rate of substitution along this indifference curve.

Is not equal to it uh not equal to point a the the slope of the budget constraint or Point C this area in between the budget constraint and the indifference curve that tells us that we're not maximizing our Behavior we're not behaving in a rational Manner and we'd actually be better off if we reallocated the way that we were spending our money.

On some on some different bundles of good or different combination of these 2 Goods so what do we need to do.

We need to figure out how to maximize utility by reallocating.

Our budget expenditures so by doing that we what we see here is now my indifference curve just lies on that budget constraint it just Touches at point B.

At this point I have now maximized my utility.

I'm now consuming 50 tacos and 5 quesadillas and at point B I can't do any better.

So what we notice also along this indifference curve.

Is that uh you know I'm no longer at Point a I'm no longer at Point c i reallocated my budget my expenditures in order to get to a better level of income if you go back.

To where we were.

And we have this higher in different curve what we remember is that higher indifference curves are better so again by reallocating a budget so in such a way that we are consuming 50 tacos and 5 quesadillas we're actually better off by being there now the key aspect here is that the slope of the budget constraint.

And the slope of the indifference curve at that point B so our margin utility of X over our marginality of why the key Point here is that those 2 things are equal to 1 another.

So this lets us know that we've reached an equilibrium point and I'm just going to rearrange this equation a little bit so that the marginal utility.

Of good X over the price of good X is equal to the marginal utility of good y over the price of Goodwill what does that mean that means that I have equated the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on each good to each to each other so good X and good y I have consumed 5 quesadillas I've consumed 50 Tacos given the prices that were uh that were given to us.

I can't do any better uh than that combination of goods so giving those prices I can't do any better.

So let's jump into another example here we're going to look at perfect substitutes and if you recall perfect substitutes were a straight line that connected uh the indifference curve is a straight line that connected from 1 uh axis to the other axis so let's just get some information here we have an income of $18 and we are choosing between lemons and limes lemons cost a150 and limes cost 1 so let's set up go ahead and get this in different curve and my budget constraint put into my graph so first let's calculate how many lemons and limes I can buy I have an income of $18 if we divide that by a dollar fifty that gives us 12 total lemons if we take the income of 1,800 or excuse me 18 dollars and divide it by 1 dollar we get 18 limes so in this case.

What we're going to get.

Is.

12 lemons 18 limes and going back to our uh utility function here.

We can see uh that we have more lives compared to lemons and if we say that these 2 goods are perfect substitutes.

Then I am going to want to put my indifference curve just at the point where the budget constraint is uh across that axis so notice here I'll get 18 units of utility by consuming all of the limes now.

What happens if my utility function changes so now I have 1 Lime plus 2 limits all right so look here so if I take 12 lemons multiply it by 2 my utility is 24 compared to the 18 LS multiplied by 1 so in this case now with that changing of my utility function I actually prefer to consume all lemons as opposed to consuming all lines so again when you have to look at the parameters in front of your 2 Goods that you're consuming and then compare it based off of how many Goods you can actually consume of each of those so now let's jump into our last 1 which is perfect complements with perfect complements now what we want to do is look at a fixed proportion or ratio of 2 goods and what we're going to do here is look at a utility function that minimizes some level of utility because if we are consuming 1 good. It and we are not consuming the other good then we're not going to get any utility from that uh that consumption because we have to consume these 2 Goods together so let's look at this example here I'm going to be looking at margaritas and tacos and it says that my utility is defined by the function men of M comma T 2T and so what I want to do is go into this utility function.

And find the ratio that I'm going to be consuming which is going to be m equals 2T so this tells me for every Margarita that I want to consume I need to also consume to Tacos to go with it otherwise my utility doesn't uh isn't going to be at maximize it's going to be either going to be zero or be consuming outside of my budget constraint which is what I can't do so let's go ahead and bring in our indifference curve remember the uh Compliments are the perfect complements have this L-shaped utility uh function or excuse me indifference curve.

And here is my scenario I have income of $4 uh tacos cost $3 and margaritas cost $6 let's take that information.

Respond our endpoints 24 divided by 3 and 24 divided by 6 so this gives us a budget constraint.

8 tacos or 4 margaritas if we were only consuming those things together.

But what I want to do is go into this and maximize my utility now to do that let's look at our budget constraint here we have $4 is equal to 6 the price of margaritas times the amount of margaritas we're going to consume.

Plus 3 tacos uh excuse me the price of tacos is 3 times the amount of tacos that we are going to consume but because I'm stuck at this ratio m equals 2T.

What I can do is substitute that in to my budget constraint so now I have 6 m + 6 M all I did was multiply the 2 and the 3 together.

And added in the M because that is the ratio so solve this down we get 24 equals 12 M and continue to solve down we get 2 equals m so I am going to consume 2 Margaritas take the 2.

Plug it back in.

To where you get uh the you get the Margaritas up here so m equals 2 * 2 which is going to give us tacos of 4.

So in this case now we see that my ratio is upholding to Margaritas for tacos that is a 1 to 2 ratio and what we see is we're going to consume 2 Margaritas 4 tacos and our utility or she's our indifference curve just lies on the budget constraint at that point so that's how you do perfect complements just keeping in mind that we're always staying in a fixed ratio all right that is it for indifference curves I hope you have enjoyed it by understanding how we bring all of this together to get to a utility maximization.

Catch you in our next one.

