Hey everyone we are continuing building our model of consumer choice and we're going to do that by looking at what we call Budget constraints now the whole idea behind budget constraints is to show us what combination of goods that we can purchase given the income that we have so let's jump into our model of budget constraints so here again shows all the possible combinations of a good or Goods a consumer can afford given their income and the prices of those goods now we're going to take that budget constraint we're going to put it into an equation and this equation here just tells us that the income that we have labeled I uh is given we can buy Goods X and Y at prices PX and py so this tells us you know we could have some combinations of X and Y given their prices and we're going to be able to buy what those are but to to really understand the budget can Trinity equation and understand how we get to the ultimate goal of looking at a budget line. On on on our graph.

What we need to do first is figure out what the endpoints are going to be and to do this what we're going to do is assumed that we're either going to purchase all of good X or all of good y so let's start with all of good X here all I've done is I've come into my budget constraint equation.

And I said you know what I'm not going to buy any of good W so all of my income is going to be devoted to purchasing good X so in this case all I did was rearrange the equation to solve for good X I can do the same thing for good why.

I say you know what I'm not gonna buy any of good X I'm gonna buy all of good Y and that tells me where this uh what the amount of good Y is that I'm going to be purchasing so for example let's say you have 500 and the price of good Y is 2.

If you buy nothing but good why then you're going to buy 250 units of whatever it happens to be same thing for good X if I have $500 and it costs 5 dollars uh for each of the good X that I want to buy then the 500 divided by 5 gives me 100 for X so all well and good those are my endpoints and I'm going to be dealing with but let's look at the budget constraint and constructing that graph so I know what the 2 end points are but I need to connect them and I need to know what that slope happens to be and that's a very important thing for us because.

What we're going to need is that slope a little bit later on when we get to the conclusion of our consumer Choice model so let's find that slope.

So I'm going to start from my budget equation and here I want to solve for y.

So what I'm going to do is start to isolate all the terms so I can solve for y.

And ultimately what I get is this equation right here so this says Y is equal to income divided by py minus PX divided by py times x now the slope of my budget constraint is minus PX over py.

So this is the important thing that we were trying to find.

And ultimately this is what we get so you'll notice I have how much I can buy if I buy nothing but why.

Given to us over here and I have uh my nothing if I buy nothing but good X this is the other endpoint of my budget constraint live.

And then.

I have all the area underneath that budget constraint line now this is the area that you know anything in that area I can purchase the problem is I don't want to purchase anything inside that green area I would prefer to be on this solid line.

That means I am spending all of my income on the consumption of the things that I want now you might say well what about savings well savings is just another way to express an economic good.

That is is going to be savings for future goods and services that you're going to buy so if you're looking at all of the goods that you currently consumed as good why and savings as good X you still want to maximize that by being on this budget constraint line now let's add in the slope of the budget constraint.

And now we have a complete picture of our budget constraint line so again anything in the green is Affordable but we don't want it anything above that budget constraint we can't get to it we don't have enough income to get to that level there so that means we are stuck bounded by this budget constraint line which is where we prefer to purchase our goods and services so let's let's look at an example here.

And.

In this example.

I assume a consumer has $100 and can buy only quesadillas at ten dollars each.  And tacos at $1 each that's a pretty expensive quesadilla.

But anyway let's set up our budget constraints so 100 equals 10 Q + 1 T So Q is my good x uh T is my good why.

And I'm going to start solving some of this down here we have our tacos and our quesadillas set up on our budget constraint graph.

And if I only consume quesadillas then I'm not going to consume any tacos so set that equal to zero.

And now to solve down this little equation here to get Q was 10.

If I only consume tacos.  Then I'm going to say you know what we're going to take that cue set it equal to zero and then we're going to solve this equation and find out that tacos if all hundred dollars that I have goes to tacos and I get 100 tacos so now I have these 2 points A and E and I can connect.

That uh those 2 points to get my budget constraint line.

So here.

All I have to do now is take the prices of X as case of D is and the prices of why is tacos set them to the slope of the budget constraint pxf for p y in this case PQ over PT.

And then I see that my budget constraint slope is minus 10 that tells me.

That anywhere along this uh budget constraint line.

That I would be willing to give up 10 tacos to gain 1 quesadilla that's how we interpret that slope let's look at some alternative combinations 50 tacos and 5 quesadillas so I spent $50 on tacos $50 on quesadillas and does it match my slope let's find out.

100 - 50 is 50.

Uh 5 minus 0 is 5 50 / 5 gives me 10 so yes A to B I still have a slope of 10.

All right our next combination 20 tacos so I spent $20 on tacos and 8 quesadillas so I spend the remaining part of my income on quesadillas and so we have 20 and 8 now let's check to see if my slope is still holding.

50 - 20 is 38 - 5 is 330 divided by 3 gives me 10.

And then lastly we have 1 more combination here uh we have 10 dollars spent on tacos so we get 10 we have 90 spent on quesadillas so we have uh 9 there and let's check 1 more time 20 minus 10 is 10 9 minus 8 is 1 10 divided by 1 is 10 so we can see that the slope of my budget line holds true from each of these different points so we do know uh that we are going to get a a -10 ratio there so for every 10 tacos that I give up I get 1 additional quesadilla or for every quesadilla that I give up I get 10 additional tacos and again we want to operate on this budget constraint line.

All right lastly let's look at Shifting the budget constraint.

So we're going to start again with our same example uh I'm going to manipulate this budget constraint line based off some different scenarios first scenario the price of good wide in this case tacos increases to 2 dollars so we went from a dollar per Taco to 2 dollars per Taco that means that our income hasn't changed we still have a hundred dollars so 100 divided by 2 now leaves me with 50 so whenever the price of the good on the vertical axis increases.

This budget constraint rotates down.

All right our next 1 price of good X in this case case D is increases to twenty dollars instead of the ten dollars it was so what we're going to see is anytime the horizontal axis good quesadillas here anytime that price increases this rotates inward.

All right so this rotates inward so now we have still a hundred dollars as our income $100 divided by the $20 uh price tag gives us 5 kcds nothing changed over here for tacos so we just rotate inward on that horizontal axis now so this is this is just the price of those goods uh changing they could increase they could decrease if they both decrease then they rotate up or they rotate out.

What happens if our income changes if our income changes.

Now we shift that entire.

Budget constraint we can now purchase more of each of those goods at that new higher uh level of income so.

Price of tacos is a is a dollar $150 minus 1 gives me 150 tacos price of quesadillas is 10.

Uh so $150 minus $10 gives me 15 quesa increase in your income your budget constraint shifts outward and you can purchase more of both of those goods if your income were to fall then your budget constraint shifts in like what we see here the purple line to the Blue Line uh so in this case you would consume less of both Goods all right that is it for Budget constraints so we're going to take this and we're going to apply it with our different curves to fully enhance our model and uh get a good conclusion here so I hope you've enjoyed it we'll catch you on our next.

