Hey everyone we are in our work problem segment of our videos and what we do in these is take a look at some exam style request style problems uh that do go along with the videos that we have been doing in other places uh so with that being said let's go ahead and jump into it and we have a budget constraint uh question leading the pack it says suppose a consumer has eighty dollars to spend on Goods X and Y the price of good X is $5 and the price of good Y is $2 so we have a 7 questions here uh the first 1 says what is the consumer's uh budget constraint equation so we know that the budget constraint equation is given to us by I equals PX * X Plus p y * y so all I need to do is supplement information I have available to me to have that consumer budget constraint equation and there we go so that's our first 1 Doane.

How much of X can they buy how much of why can they buy so we know that the amount of x that you can buy if you buy know why is given to you by that equation the amount of why that you can buy if you buy know X is given to us by this equation so all I need to do is substitute in those values and I'll have x equals 80 over 5 and Y equals 80 over 2 and 5 goes into 86 times and uh 2 goes into 80 400 times so that is how much of each of those that they can buy.

Now it says graph the budget constraint equation so what I want to do is come over here.

And just graph this out so I'm going to put good y over here where it belongs good X over here where it belongs we know we had 16.

There and we had 40 as our endpoint there and now all I need to do is just draw a straight line and straight as I'm going to get uh straight line down and this is my budget constraint equation now the last part asked me what is the slope of this and remember the slope is minus the price of good X over the price of good y so all I need to do is go in here and put in 5 over 2 and I get minus 2.5 so that lets me know uh that we have a slope of minus 2.5 I could easily verify this.

0 to 40 is 40 and 0 to 16 is 16 there's actually a minus there and if you simplify this down you do get 2.5 all right let's move on to our next question.

Based on the graph to the right so we're dealing with a different curves here which point provides the least utility now remember.

As we move up our indifference curve map we get more utility so u3 has the highest amount of utility followed by YouTube followed by U1 so any point on You Want A B C or D is going to provide uh the least amount of utility so I'm going to say you won.

Any point on you 1 provides that least amount of utility.

All right based on the graph to the right.

What is the marginal rate of substitution between points B and C so we're going from B.

All the way to C and we start at 5 and we go down to 2 so we lose 3 units of good Y and we move from 2 and we go to 5 so we gain 3 units of good X so that lets me know I'm losing 3y and I'm gaining 3x so that's pretty simple I can tell my margin rate of substitution is going to be 1 y equals 1X so for every unit of good y that I lose I gain 1 unit of good X.

All right so next question so let me just put that right here as well.

1 y equals 1X based on the graph to the right what is the marginal rate of substitution between points A and B so now moving.

Here all the way down to B so I'm going to go from 10.

The favs and I'm going to go from 1 to 2 so I lose 5 y.

And I gain 1X so in this case my margin rate substitution is 5 y to 1x so what we can say here is my margin rate of substitution 5y.

Over 1X or 5 so I lose 5 to gain 1 in this case so you can also see that as we move from A to B and then B to C we have the diminishing marginal rate of substitution taking place because this was lose 1 Watts 1X but now we lose 5 y to 1x at the higher point so we do go from 5 here to 1 there which means we're going to get something even less here I'm just going to do it C to D we use 1 y to gain 5 so this is going to be a marginal rate of substitution of 1/5 you're only willing to give up 1/5 of good y to get 1 unit of good X.  All right let's move to our next question now this 1's going to be a little bit more involved so let's work through this slowly.

Uh consumers utility functions given by the following uh utility function is equal to XY where X and Y are 2 Goods obviously the consumer has a budget of 720 the price of X is 30 the price of why is 40 and it asks us and let's uh ask us how many units of good X and Y with a consumer consumed at the optimal point so that right here.

Lets me know that I'm looking for PX py is equal to mux.

Muy I'm trying to find the point where the budget constraint just touches the indifference curve now we need to work through this.

The first thing we want to do is Define marginal utility because that's going to help us to determine what these 2 items are and marginal utility is the derivative of the utility function with respect to X and the mark utility of the derivative uh excuse me the utility function with respect to Y and so here I'm going to come into this equation.

I was going to use the power rule which is very simple so uh the the partial derivative of the utility function with respect to X.

Is just Why.

And the partial derivative of the utility function with respect to Y is just X now we know that the marginal rate of substitution is given to us by mux over muy so all I have to do is sub in what I have and this is going to give me.

Y over X so that's the first part of the equation first part of the set of solving the problem second part of solving this problem.

Actually have a few parts.

It's going to be looking at the price ratio so the price ratio.

PX py or the slope of budget constraint is going to be given to us by this we have price of X of 30 price of y 40 and so our.

Slope of our budget constraint is going to be 3/4 now there is a minus sign in there I'm just ignoring it for right now so now I have the 2 items that I need.

And what I want to do is just solve these 2 items that is set these 2 items equal to 1 another so this is part 3.

So I'm going to set my smart utility of X over bars utility y equal to the slope of the budget constraint so this is going to give me y over X is equal to uh 34.

And at this point what I want to do is just solve down for y so I'm going to multiply both sides by X and this is going to give me y equals 34x okay y equals 34x so now I know what Y is equal to so I can go into my budget constraint so step number 4 go into my budget constraint and substitute Y in uh wherever I see why substitute that in for it so let's set up our budget constraints 720.

Is equal to 30X + 40 uh why which was 3/4.

All right.

At this point all I need to do is just solve down for this and so let's do that uh this is going to give me 720 is equal to 30X uh 40 times 3 is 120 120 divided by 4 is going to be also 30X.

All right and now we have 720 equals 60x.

And all I have to do is just solve this down 720 divided by 6 is 12 so x equals 12.

All right now that I know what x is equal to I can sub it back in.

So now step 5.

Sub it back in So 720 equals uh 30 times 12.

Plus 40 y I don't know why I put that in parentheses but I did and this is 720 equals 360 plus 40 Y and we have 40 y equaling 360 and divide both uh sides by 40 and we see that y equals 9 so our optimal bundle.

Here let's just draw it all in so we had uh do we even solve for that how many you can get of each doesn't really matter.

So our indifference curve here that's a terrible looking indifference curve good why good x what we would do is just Sub in those numbers 9 and 12 this is what we were trying to find that is our optimal bundle.

All right let's go to our next question.

Utility maximization and budget constraints refer to the graph to the right we are concerning budget constraint B3 with total income equal to $200.

All right total income is equal to dollars what are the prices of Y and X well remember we know that uh to find X its income divided by the price of X in this case we know what our income is and we know what x is X is uh not 15x is 20 so in this case we have 20 oops maybe redo this.

In this case we have 20 equals.

200 over the price of X and now all I have to do is just solve out for this uh and this is going to give me $10 so price of good X.

Is $10 so just 200 divided by 10 gives me 20 do the same thing for a while we know that this is how we find how much why we can consume put in the values of why that we know we have 100 equals 200 over the price of why and the answer is going to be why uh the price of why.

Is equal to $2 simply divide 200 by 2 you get 100 for a good while.

So those are our prices all right 1 more question.

Refer to this graph to the right we are considering.

Budget constraint B3 again all right.

And the person has a marginal rate of substitution of 2 watt to 1x.

Are they maximizing their utility so what we were wondering is uh at Point a I don't even know if point a matters what we're wondering is.

Is the indifference curve.

Uh I want you 1 whatever is that a difference curve lying on that budget constraint is it below it is it above it what's going on here well let's recall I mean so this is the same problem we just saw so we do know.

That the price of X is $10 and we know that the price of why was $2 so the slope of the budget line is going to be 10 over 2 which is also the same as saying 5 but my marginal rate of substitution is 2y and 1X okay so 2y and 1X uh that's basically saying.

Excuse me that's basically saying the margin utility of X margin utility of Y is going to be equal to what.

1 over 2 yeah 1 over 2 1X over 2y and that just simplifies down to 1/2 so now we're going to compare those 2 numbers well 5.

Last time I checked does not equal 1/2 so what do we do in this case well my margin utility per dollar spent uh let's just do that margin utility per dollar spent um let's do.

X so for X this is going to be 1 over 10.

For why this is going to be 2 over 2 so uh what I would want to do in this case is consumed less why.

All right consume less why and consume more X because X is much much smaller than y x is 1/10 compared to 1 so if I consume less of good Y and more of good X know I got that backwards I actually want to spend more.

So spend more on why.

And less on X and the reason is uh your large utility for X is already very low compared to your margin utility for y so if you spend more on why that's actually going to lower the amount of uh margin utility per dollar spent and if you spend less on X it's going to raise the amount of the margin utility per dollar spent on X so in this case are they maximizing their utility know they are not maximizing their utility and this is the prescription that we need for them spend more on why and spend less on X and that is it for our work problems hope you have enjoyed these more to come.

