Hey everyone.  We are now going to take what we have so far with our demand curves and understand why it's beneficial for us to consume at different prices.

That is how we turn what we buy, what we purchase, how we turn that into additional wealth for ourselves.

That is, we may have something that we're willing to pay $20 for, but we buy it at $10.

That means there's 10 extra dollars that we were willing to put towards that item that we now get to keep.

This is what we refer to as consumer surplus.

Let's jump into it.

Let's start with, I guess, a price of $20.

Here we have a downward sloping demand curve.

And this is going to be for the market in itself.

And we have different prices that we're going to look at.

$15 corresponds to one movie ticket.

$13 corresponds to two movie tickets, $11 corresponds to three movie tickets, $9 and four movie tickets.

And then we're going to leave that as our market price.

Now, I did say that this was the market, but let's just assume this is the actual individual.

So this is an individual's demand curve.

This is how many movie tickets they are willing to purchase at different prices.

So this might be a per week basis, it might be a per month basis, but at $20, this person's not willing to purchase any movie tickets.

At $9, we see that four movie tickets are willing and able to be purchased.

Now, how do we calculate how much wealth we get to generate from the transactions that take place?

That is, how much extra are we going to be able to keep in our pockets if we engage in this market activity?

We want to go to the movie, we want to buy that movie ticket, but how much extra could we have left over by doing so?

So let's start with the areas that we need to look for.

The first area that we want to look for at a price of $15 is to say, hey, the consumer surplus is the price that I'm willing to pay.

I'm willing to pay maybe up to 20, but I don't really want to.

But the price is $15.

So what we end up seeing is at the price of $15, anything that's below that demand curve represents some level of surplus for us.

That is, it might be minuscule, it might be great, but the area all combined together is going to give us the total surplus or total consumer surplus from participating in that market transaction.

So we know from basic geometry that the area of a right triangle is one half the base times the height.

It doesn't Matter which one is the base or which one's the height.

In this case I just have 20 minus 15.

All right, so let's make this the height.

And then the base is one minus zero.

So we just do half of that, which is the 0.5.

So 20 minus 15 is 5.

5 times 1 is going to be what?  5.

Half of 5 is 250.

So by participating in this market at that particular price, we generate a consumer surplus of 250.

What happens if the market price is lower to $13?

Now we do all of the area 20 to 13 and 0 to 2.

The purple shaded area here is just to highlight the fact that this is the additional consumer surplus gain.

We could do it by area.

We could break this up into the rectangle there and the triangle there and solve that out for the additional gain.

But the entire area, the entire right triangle that we want to consider, both of those colors yield us a consumer surplus of $7.

Let's continue on.

If we lower the price to $11, we gain this additional consumer surplus in the green area, but the entire consumer surplus again, 1/2 the base times the height, which yields us $13.50.

Finally, finally, if the market price happens to be $9, then we add in the additional consumer surplus that we gain.

So this orange area, and we find that our total surplus 20 -9, which is 11, 0 to 4, which is 4.

So 9, 11 times 4 is going to give us 44.

Half of that is $22.

So that's our total consumer surplus by participating in this market, by buying those movie tickets, you know, whatever week, month, whatever it happens to be, basis, and we're better off by that amount.

So we can take that $22 and we could do something else with it, which is great.  That's what we want to do.

Now this is the standard way to look at consumer surplus.

But we can look at it one other way, and that is to go back to the indifference curves that we've been dealing with.

So let's start with the budget constraint there, B1.

We'll add in our indifference curve U1.

You'll notice this looks a little bit different than the ones that we had been using.

And there's a specific reason for that.

I needed to have that indifference curve u1 actually touch the axis there.

So this is a little bit more complicated, something that requires a little bit more calculus to solve out.

But what we're going to be doing is deriving compensated demand curves implicitly, that is the compensated demand curves, again are a little bit more involved in the math, but implicitly what we're going to see is how much I would need to be compensated if my consumption of movie tickets.

Currently it's at $36 being spent, and I spend $17 on all other goods.

But if my consumption of movie tickets all of a sudden just disappeared, like I could no longer purchase movie tickets, how much would I need to be compensated for that?

So here, what we're going to say at point B, $44 could be spent on all other goods.

Let's just see what happens now at point A.

And this is the reason why this indifference curve touches that axis, because we need to know how much do I need to give this person if all of a sudden I say, hey, look, you can no longer purchase movie tickets, so they're going to lose some utility.

So how much do I need to compensate this person in order for them to have the same level of utility at point D as they would at point A?

Because we can clearly see point A is above the budget constraint B1.

It's above the budget constraint by amount of $12, which means we'd actually need to compensate this person $12 if we said you have to restrict all of your spending to $44 on the other goods, and you can't consume anything here with movie tickets.

So we compensate this person by $12.

And in this case, that puts them back on their Original Indifference Curve U1, and they're.  And they're okay.

I mean, they may still want movie tickets, but we get them back to their original level of utility.

That's the compensated demand that we're talking about.

Again, a little bit more complicated to solve mathematically, so the graphical representation will suffice for now.

Now, if we have another budget constraint and another indifference curve, the analysis is still the same here.

We're going to start at point e.

We spend $12 on all other goods.

We spend $27 on movie tickets.

And we clearly see that we're pretty good right here.

We have a profit, not a profit.  Excuse me.

We have a utility maximization bundle at point E.

So everything's good.

But what happens if all of a sudden I have to say to this person, you can no longer consume movie tickets?  What do we do?

Well, we move to point C.

So they're spending $40 on all other goods, which means we need to compensate them the additional $4 there, 44 minus 40, in order for this person to be back on their original utility curve?

You two indifference curve U2.

And in this case, this person will be just as good as they were when they were at point E because they're in difference curve view 2.

All right, so that's two different ways to look at consumer surplus.

Hope you have enjoyed it and we'll catch you in our next one.

