Hey, everyone.  We are going to be looking at how we move from individual demand to market demand.

And let's just go ahead and jump into it.

So we're going to start with the quantity demanded at each price per month for our consumers, Jay, Jonah and Jameson.

And we are going from prices of $16 down to $6 in $2 increments.

And for Jay, at a price of $16, it goes from zero in terms of the quantity demanded.

Jay actually does not pick up anything until the price is $10.

So for us, Jay's demand curve is going to actually start at the intercept of $12.

And let's go ahead and draw that in here.

So here's dj.

Dj, Excuse me.

Here is the demand for J.

It starts at 12, and at a price of 10, we're going to have a quantity of 1.

At a price of 8, we're going to have a number of 2.

And at a price of 6, we're going to have a quantity.

Now we do the same thing for Jonah.

Jonah, we don't get our first quantity demand until a price of $12.

So we're gonna start at a price of 14 as the intercept.

So we go from 0 to 1 and we do that at a price of 12.

So start at 12, move over and then go down and we get to the one there, do the same thing for Jameson.

So here's our demand curve for Jameson.

Now we have three individual demand curves in this market.

And we can see that what we want to do is say, all right, we have three people.

How much is quantity demand for the market if these are our three participants?

So what we need to do is start horizontally adding or summing the total amount at each price.

So if we are at a price of $6, then Jay wants three, Jonah wants four, Jameson wants five.

So three plus four plus is going to give us 12.

We do that for each individual price and what we're going to end up with is a market demand curve that looks like this.

So at a price of 16, no one wants to purchase any movie tickets.

At a price of 14, we get one movie ticket purchase that comes from Jameson.

At a price of 12, we get a total of 3.

The combined quantity from Jonah and Jameson of 1 and 2.

Then a price of 10, we get 6 movie tickets.

That comes from the 1 plus 2 plus 3.

And then at a price of 8, we get a total of 9 movie tickets.

And that is the 2 plus 3 plus 4.

And then we've already calculated that we do get 12 at a price of 6 so this is how we construct our market demand curve from individual demand curves.

So that covers how we construct the market demand curve.

Now, this really just dealt with the price of the good and the quantity demanded of the good.

But what takes place whenever we have something besides the price of the good changing?

And again, remember, when the price of a good changes, that affects the quantity demanded of the good.

But we're also curious about what happens whenever we have changes in demand.

That is, the demand curve either increases, as it does here, it shifts to the right or it decreases, that is, it shifts to the left or shifts downward.

So what are the things that cause these increases in demand and decreases in demand?

Let's start with changes in the price of related goods.

And we have two types of related goods that we deal with.

The first is substitutes.

So let's take, for example, ball games.

Ball games in this case could be a football game, baseball game, basketball game.

Whatever happens, whatever kind of ball games that you like to actually like to watch at sporting arenas here.

So the price of a ball game decreases.

That makes it less attractive for a movie ticket, because now it's more expensive, relatively speaking, to go see that movie than it is to go to that ballgame.

So in this case, your demand for going to a movie is going to decrease.

And when we aggregate that up to the market, we see that the demand curve is going to shift backwards to the left.

So if the price of a substitute goes down, the demand for that item is going to decrease.

Now, if the price of the substitute increases, then it's more attractive to go to the own good, in this case the movie tickets.

So you do want to go to the movies when the price of a ballgame increases.

So it's actually, it's relatively more attractive to do so.

Now the other type of related good that we deal with are compliments.

Compliments here are going to be things that go along with bibby tickets.

So popcorn, for example, you go to the movies, you buy a tub of popcorn.

What happens to demand at the price of popcorn decreases?

Well, we might see more movie tickets being bought because it's relatively cheaper to go to the movies now than what it was before.

If the price of a movie ticket is $9, the price of popcorn is $10, so $19 originally.

Now all of a sudden, the price of popcorn is half of 10.

So now it's $14 to go to the movies.

It's a little bit more attractive to go to the movies than what it was before.

So demand is going to increase.

That is so if the price of a of the complement good decreases, the demand for the item increases, as noted by this increase in demand here.

Now, if you have your popcorn price increasing, then what we're going to see is the demand curve is going to shift backwards and it's going to decrease.

Now it's more expensive to go to the movies, meaning people aren't as willing to spend as much money to go to the movie.

So the demand for movie tickets is going to fall.

So substitute goods, whenever you look at the prices and the demand, they move in the same direction.

Price decreases, demand decreases, price increases, demand increases.

But compliments move in opposite directions.

If the price of one thing decreases, the demand for the other thing increases.

If the price of one thing increases, then the demand for the other thing decreases.

So keep that in mind when you're looking at your substitutes and your compliments.

Now, you also have your changes in income.

This is something that we have been dealing with, and we have our normal goods.

Typically, what we see with normal goods is that whenever income increases, demand increases, and whenever income decreases, demand decreases.

That's a normal good.

But you also have your inferior goods, which move in opposite directions.

So with inferior goods, if your income decreases, you tend to increase demand for that particular item.

There are quite a few examples.

You can look at ramen noodles, for example.

That's a staple for many college kids.

Ramen noodles, they don't have much income to deal with, so they tend to gravitate towards things like ramen noodles.

But then if your income increases, your demand is going to decrease.

So in this case, what we see, normal goods move in the same direction with their changes.

Inferior goods move in opposite directions with their changes.  All right, that is it.

Hope you've enjoyed it and we'll catch you on our next one.

